WIP: gatsby-graphql-source-toolkit (#25468)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: packages/gatsby-graphql-source-toolkit/README.md

([more technical details][4]).

Also, with `gatsby-source-graphql` you can't leverage the power of Gatsby transformer plugins like `gatsby-transformer-remark`
or `gatsby-transformer-sharp` (and it's hard to use with `gatsby-image` as a consequence).

This new toolkit should solve all those issues and implement correct node sourcing for Gatsby.

## Features

- Efficient concurrent data fetching
- Automatic data pagination
- Cache data between runs (supports sourcing delta changes)
- Customize what is sourced
- Schema customization out of the box (no performance penalty of type inference)
- Designed to support [Gatsby Preview][5] and [Incremental Builds][6]

## How it works

Let's imagine we have a GraphQL API located at `https://www.example.com/graphql`.
This example API has the following straightforward schema:

```graphql
type Post {
  id: ID!
  description(truncateAt: Int): String
  author: Author
}

type Author {
  id: ID!
  name: String
  allPosts: [Post]
}

type Query {
  author(id: ID!): Author
  authors(limit: Int = 10, offset: Int = 0): [Author]
  post(id: ID!): Post
  posts(limit: Int = 10, offset: Int = 0): [Post]
}
```

> How do we source data from this GraphQL API using the toolkit?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better understand how to source data from this GraphQL API using the toolkit,
```

> Let's look at the full example and then walk through it step-by-step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
look at the full example and then walk through it step-by-step.
```

```js
async function createSourcingConfig(gatsbyApi) {
  // Step1. Setup remote schema:
  const execute = createDefaultQueryExecutor(`https://www.example.com/graphql`)
  const schema = await loadSchema(execute)

  // Step2. Configure Gatsby node types
  const gatsbyNodeTypes = [
    {
      remoteTypeName: `Post`,
      remoteIdFields: [`__typename`, `id`],

>       queries: `query LIST_POSTS { posts(limit: $limit, offset: $offset) }`,

Author: Actually I was moving back and forth with it :) And here are the main reasons why a single document:

1. People may have multiple `LIST` queries for the same node type (maybe, with different filters)
2. There may be custom queries for special cases (e.g. Tyler uses separate queries for Previews in WP plugin).

So we can end up with many documents for a single node type. Having a single document allows us to inject fragments to all queries (even custom) and also have a unified way to run those (by just providing `operationName`).

Convention for operation names is also useful for runtime debugging and error reporting: you can simply output operation name with a list of variables.

It can also help to batch only given "kind" of queries. For example, I've found batching `nodeQuery` to make the most sense (batching `listQuery` makes much less sense). I guess we could differentiate queries by some other method but naming conventions seem to be the easiest way.

Also, IDEs and GraphQL editors support documents with multiple operations just fine and graphql-js designed in a way that supports them well too.

And there is an easy way to convert single document to a list of documents via [`separateOperations` utility](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-js/blob/master/src/utilities/separateOperations.js). It's a bit more complex to do the other way around.

As you may see, the toolkit uses the remote schema as a reference, but it doesn't clone it 1 to 1.

Instead, it takes all the fields from the sourcing query (including aliased fields)
and adds them to Gatsby node type with slight changes:

- every type name is prefixed with `gatsbyTypePrefix` setting (`Post` => `ExamplePost` in our case)
- all field arguments are removed
- type of the field remains semantically the same as in the remote schema

---

**Why?** The primary motivation is to support arbitrary field arguments of the remote schema.

In general the following field definition: `field(arg: Int!)` can't be directly copied
from the remote schema unless we know all usages of `arg` during Gatsby build.

To workaround this problem we ask you to provide those usages in fragments as
aliased fields:

```graphql
fragment MyFragment on RemoteType {
  field(arg: 0)
  alias1: field(arg: 1)
  alias2: field(arg: 2)
}
```

Then we add those `alias1` and `alias2` fields to Gatsby type so that you could access
them in Gatsby's queries.

---

### 6. Source nodes

Here we take all the queries compiled in [step 4](#4-compile-sourcing-queries), execute them

> against the remote GraphQL API and transform results to Gatsby nodes using [createNode action][11].

Reviewer 2: also add code fences for `createNode`:
```suggestion
against the remote GraphQL API, and transform results to Gatsby nodes using [`createNode` action][11].
```

}

interface IPaginationAdapter<TPage, TItem> {
  name: string
  expectedVariableNames: string[]
  start(): IPageInfo
  next(current: IPageInfo, page: TPage): IPageInfo
  concat(acc: TPage, page: TPage): TPage
  getItems(page: TPage): Array<TItem | null>
}
```

Check out the `src/config/pagination-adapters` folder for examples.

> Note: when setting `paginationAdapters` option you override built-in adapters completely
> So if you want to be able to still use one of the existing adapters, pass them along with
> your custom adapters:

```js
const { PaginationAdapters } = require("gatsby-graphql-source-toolkit")
const MyCustomAdapter = {
  // Your implementation
}
const config = {
  // ... other options
  paginationAdapters: PaginationAdapters.concat(MyCustomAdapter),
}
```

## Tools Reference

### Configuration Tools

#### createDefaultQueryExecutor

Creates default query executor suitable for [sourcing config](#query-executor):

```ts
function createDefaultQueryExecutor(
  uri: string,
  fetchOptions: FetchOptions,
  queueOptions: PQueueOptions<any, any> = { concurrency: 10 }
): IQueryExecutor
```

This implementation sends GraphQL requests using [`node-fetch`][14]

> (see library documentation for all possible `FetchOptions`). It also uses [p-queue][13]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see library documentation for all possible `FetchOptions`). It also uses [`p-queue`][13]
```

to restrict the number of concurrently executed queries.
Default concurrency level is `10`, try increasing it to achieve higher throughput.

#### wrapQueryExecutorWithQueue

Takes existing query `executor` function and creates a new function with the same signature
that runs with given concurrency level (`10` by default).

```ts
function wrapQueryExecutorWithQueue(
  executor: IQueryExecutor,
  queueOptions: PQueueOptions<any, any> = { concurrency: 10 }
): IQueryExecutor
```

> Under the hood it uses [p-queue][13] library to limit concurrency level, so refer to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Under the hood it uses [`p-queue`][13] library to limit concurrency level, so refer to
```

the library docs for all available `queueOptions`.

#### loadSchema

Executes [GraphQL introspection query][7] using provided [query executor](#query-executor)
and creates an instance of [GraphQL Schema][15] using [`buildClientSchema`][16] utility from
`graphql-js` package.

```ts
async function loadSchema(execute: IQueryExecutor): Promise<GraphQLSchema>
```

#### buildNodeDefinitions

Simple utility that merges user-defined node type configs ([step 2](#2-configure-gatsby-node-types))
with compiled queries ([step 4](#4-compile-sourcing-queries)) for every node type and produces
a value suitable for `gatsbyNodeDefs` option of the [sourcing config](#configuration).

```ts
type RemoteTypeName = string

interface IBuildNodeDefinitionArgs {
  gatsbyNodeTypes: IGatsbyNodeConfig[]
  documents: Map<RemoteTypeName, DocumentNode>
}

export function buildNodeDefinitions(
  args: IBuildNodeDefinitionArgs
): Map<RemoteTypeName, IGatsbyNodeDefinition>
```

### Query compilation tools

> #### generateDefaultFragments

Reviewer 2: should not all function names in header (and in TOC) to be in code fences?

Example:
```suggestion
#### `generateDefaultFragments`
```
